## Energy &amp; Environmental Science

## PAPER

<!-- image -->

Cite this: Energy Environ. Sci. , 2022, , 1601

1

5

Received 12th October 2021, Accepted 22nd February 2022

DOI: 10.1039/d1ee03194e

rsc.li/ees

## Broader context

The use of non-noble metal based materials to replace conventional Pt-group catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is strongly restricted by their actual performances. Among them, Fe based atomic materials are considered as highly promising candidates while maintaining both their high activity and stability is significantly challenging. Aiming at solving this issue, we herein propose a new electronic structure-regulating method by rationally designing a Fe-Zn based diatomic catalyst with a half-metallic structure. The introduction of Zn not only substantially enhances its reactivity for the ORR but more importantly, the sacrificial Zn-N bond breakage as well as the elevation of the protonation energy barrier can also stabilize FeN4 sites that were always not well-maintained in the conventional methods, resulting in high stability of the as-synthesized catalyst. This work provides an in-depth understanding of the protonation mechanism of Fe-based catalysts and opens up a new avenue for the design of advanced electrocatalysts for energy conversion and storage use.

## Introduction

Fuel cells and metal-air batteries are considered as promising strategies to effectively remit global warming and fulfill the target of carbon neutrality. 1-8 Conventional electrocatalysts used in these forms for improving the sluggish kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) are precious metals (such as Pt) with high cost and low natural reserves. 9-15 Therefore, the development of cost-effective catalysts with high reactivity and stability is the crucial step for promoting commercialization of these energy technologies. In the past decade, single atom catalysts (SACs) with the structure of isolated transition metal-nitrogen modified carbon (denoted as M-N-C where M stands for metal) are emerging as promising candidates to replace noble-metal catalysts due to their high atomic utilization and a unique local electronic structure. 16-22 Among them, Fe based catalysts with great electrochemical performances and appropriate binding capabilities to oxygen-containing intermediates are attractive for bringing out a breakthrough in nonprecious-metal ORR catalysts. 23-32 However, they still suffer from performance attenuation during the long-term ORR process due to the intermediate valence state of Fe 2+ that tends to trigger various side reactions. Developing durable Fe based electrocatalysts with high performance is thus highly desirable.

a School of Metallurgy, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, P. R. China. E-mail: lilicmu@alumni.cmu.edu

b State Key Laboratory of Rolling and Automation, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, Liaoning, P. R. China

c Department of Chemistry, College of Science, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, Liaoning, P. R. China

d Key Laboratory of Applied Chemistry in Hebei Province, Yanshan University, Qinhuangdao 066004, Hebei, P. R. China. E-mail: jwang6027@ysu.edu.cn

† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee03194e

,

2

0

<!-- image -->

View Article Online View Journal | View Issue

## A durable half-metallic diatomic catalyst for efficient oxygen reduction †

<!-- image -->

Hongguan Li, ab Shuanlong Di, c Ping Niu, ab Shulan Wang, c Jing Wang * d and Li Li * ab

<!-- image -->

Single atom metal-nitrogen-carbon materials have shown immense potential for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) while the development of durable catalysts with high reactivity remains a great challenge. Herein, by rationally designing a diatomic catalyst Fe/Zn-N-C based on theoretical screening, we propose a unique half-metallic electronic structure induced by cooperation of Fe and Zn. This structure populates spontaneous spin-polarized conduction electrons at the Fermi level, resulting in an enhancement in free O2 capture and bonding. Meanwhile, the active center of FeN4 is well preserved with Zn-N as the sacrificial bond during the ORR. Fe/Zn-N-C therefore achieved remarkable ORR activities in both acidic and alkaline media as well as impressive long-term durability that outperform most state-of-the-art catalysts and commercial benchmarks. This work advances our fundamental knowledge of the structure-performance relationship for ORR electrocatalysts, which could potentially inspire the exploration of high-performance candidates via electronic structure modulation.

Different potential solutions have been proposed to improve the long-life durability of Fe-based SACs. For instance, increasing the graphitization degree of a supported carbon matrix may enhance the stability of the Fe singlet active center by restraining the corrosion of the carbon lattice. 33 The design of metal-organic framework derived SACs is also confirmed as an effective approach to stabilize metal atoms and the as-prepared catalysts showed decent stability. 34,35 Diatomic catalysts (DACs) use two adjacent metal atomic pairs to replace the sole metal atom for maximizing their functionalities through interactions and synergistic actions while maintaining the advantageous features of SACs, 36,37 which may address the durability issue. Meanwhile, their tunable multifunctionalities through restructuring metal groups also provide an ideal platform for the design of high performance electrocatalysts. To date, although some encouraging results have been achieved in structural stability enhancement for ORR catalysts, regulation of atomic pairs to improve the catalytic stability is rarely reported. It is still very challenging to maintain the stability of catalysts in both alkaline and acidic media without sacrificing the reactivity and to achieve an indepth understanding of the corresponding reaction mechanism.

Herein, we report the development of a diatomic catalyst with a half-metallic electronic structure by pairing Zn with FeN-C to maintain the durability of active centers and high reactivity. Systematic theoretical calculations were performed to finalize the selection of metallic pairs from the promising transition metal candidates. Among them, the Fe-Zn pair showed the highest protonation free energy, indicating its potentially highest stability. The diatomic catalyst was synthesized through high temperature pyrolysis of chitosan with excellent coordination capability and composite metal sources while the detailed structure characterization confirms their atomic dispersion sites with a coordination number of 4.02. Strikingly, the subsequent theoretical calculations reveal that Fe 3d orbitals are broadened with the conduction electrons spontaneously spin-polarized at the Fermi level, leading to the formation of a half-metallic electronic structure. The asymmetric electronic structure benefits oxygen-involving electrocatalysis from non-uniform charge distribution. 38-40 This unique electronic structure with electrons in only one spin channel guarantees a high O2 capture ratio, fast charge transfer and facile Fe-O bond formation. In addition to lifting the protonation free energy, the incorporation of Zn into diatomic sites also results in the preservation of FeN4 with breakage of Zn-N bonds instead. Based on these aforementioned micro-/ electronic-structural advantages, the catalyst showed both high half-wave potentials of 0.906 V in 0.1 M KOH and 0.808 V in 0.1 M HClO4, which exceed most state-of-the-art electrocatalysts including the noble-metal benchmark. Furthermore, it also presented high long-term durability under harsh acidic conditions that are required in practical applications with only 12 mV loss after 5000 potential cycles. This work provides a strategy to achieve both high stability and reactivity for ORR catalysts through electronic structure regulation, which may provide some new insights for the design of high-performance electrocatalysts for energy use.

## Results

## Material screening for Fe/metal-N-C DACs

Theoretical screening was initially performed to search for a potential pairable metal candidate that can serve as the active catalytic center while also effectively interacting with Fe for stabilization. Considering the atomic structural similarity that can minimize the effect of demetallization for damaging M-NC bonds from the external atom introduction and multiple spin states that can lead to different interactions between metal pairs, five metallic elements (M = Mn, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn) with more than half-filled 3d orbitals (3d 5 -3d 10 ) that have high driving forces to bond with Fe and sufficient freedom for charge and spin control are selected. Accordingly, their protonation process (including Fe/Fe and Fe/M with 6 models presented in Fig. S1, ESI † ) was simulated with both one and two hydrogen atoms adsorbed on the surface of the reaction center (denoted as 1*H and 2*H), respectively. The calculated free energies ( D G ) required for the protonation with one and two hydrogen atoms are shown in Fig. 1a and b, respectively. It can be clearly observed that all D G values for the six bimetal catalysts are positive, demonstrating the endothermic nature of the protonation process in thermodynamics that has an energy barrier for its occurrence. Meanwhile, with the increase in the number of electrons from the paired metals (namely from Mn to Zn), the D G values of Fe/M-NC show the same trend for both 1*H and 2*H processes and increase dramatically, indicating the increased difficulty for protonation. The highest values are achieved for Fe/Zn-NC ( D G 1*H: 3.92 eV and D G 2*H: 7.47 eV) among all metal pairs (Fig. 1b and Fig. S2, ESI † ), which demonstrate their potentially highest tolerant capability to the protonation process. 41 Moreover, considering the presence of O2 may accelerate the protonation process, 42,43 we further simulated the case in the presence of O2 adsorption and Fe/ZnN-C still presented the highest energy barrier for protonation (Fig. S3 and S4, ESI † ). Therefore, based on the aforementioned theoretical analysis for different Fe-M metal pairs, Fe/Zn-N-C was preliminarily selected as the focused catalyst for further study on its electrocatalytic performance of the ORR.

## Synthesis and microstructure investigation of Fe/Zn-N-C

Fe/Zn-N-C DAC (Fig. 1c) was synthesized through pyrolysis of dual-metal sources with chitosan as the nitrogen-carbon source at high temperatures, followed by acid leaching (details can be found in the Methods section). Chitosan with strong metal coordination capability and a rigid chain structure is viewed as a desirable matrix to host the metals with uniform dispersion and to form the atomic site. 44-46 The synthesized Fe/Zn-N-C catalyst showed a porous sheet-like structure (Fig. 1d, Fig. S5 and S6, ESI † ) with a specific surface area value of 1380.82 m 2 g /C0 1 that is higher than those of Fe-N-C (431.39 m 2 g /C0 1 ) and Zn-N-C (799.95 m 2 g /C0 1 ) (Fig. S7, ESI † ), arising from the gas release due to decomposition of ammonium chloride and chitosan functional groups during pyrolysis. The hierarchical porous structure with sufficient micro-/mesopores ( o 3 nm) is favorable for increasing the active site density

## Paper

Fig. 1 Calculated free energies required for two-step protonation: (a) D G 1*H and (b) D G 2*H for Fe/M-N-C (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn). (c) Schematic illustration of the structure of the Fe/Zn-N-C DAC. (d) Bright field TEM image, (e) elemental mapping, (f) AC image of Fe/Zn-N-C (diatomic Fe-Zn sites are marked by orange circles) and (g) the intensity profile for atomic pairs (the unit for the value of the horizontal axis is Å).

<!-- image -->

and promoting O2 diffusion during the ORR process. Metal-rich particles are neither observed in transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images (Fig. 1d) nor detected in X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. S8, ESI † ), indicating the absence of metallic metals, oxides or metal carbides in the catalyst after acid leaching. The energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopic (EDS) elemental mapping (Fig. 1e) indicates that N, Fe and Zn elements are uniformly distributed on the carbon matrix. The homogeneous distribution of metals through the entire architecture can be further confirmed by the aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field (AC-HAADF) image (Fig. 1f), in which many tiny bright spots that are assigned to Fe and Zn atoms due to their larger atomic numbers than the carbon matrix can be clearly observed, as highlighted with orange circles. A statistical analysis of 25 couples shows an average distance of atomic pairs of B 2.5 Å, underlining an intimate interaction between metallic atoms (Fig. 1g). More importantly, the two adjacent atoms in the intensity profiles show different contrasts (Fig. 1g), confirming that the atomic pair is composed of two different elements. 47

Raman spectra indicate that defects are generated during the preparation process and the introduction of Fe/Zn metals enhanced the defect levels of the carbon matrix with an increased ratio of I D/ I G (1.28) over Fe-N-C (1.10) and Zn-N-C (1.13) (Fig. S9, and Table S1, ESI † ), which is beneficial for electrical conductivity enhancement and mass/charge transfer within the catalyst. 48,49 The chemical states and compositions of DACs were also investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) with high resolution elemental profiles presented in Fig. S10-S12 and Table S2-S4 (ESI † ). N doping into the carbon skeleton is confirmed by the presence of a C-N peak at a binding energy of 286.1 eV in the C 1s spectrum (Fig. S10a, ESI † ). The apparent Fe/Zn-N peak can be observed at a binding energy of 398.1 eV in the N 1s spectrum (Fig. S10b, ESI † ) with a high content of 18.4% (Table S2, ESI † ), indicating the successful

|

## Paper

loading of metal atoms on the carbon matrix. Two peaks at 1021.2 eV and 1044.4 eV are attributed to the positively charged Zn atoms (Fig. S10c, ESI † ), while the weak peaks for Fe atoms are unrecognizable by XPS (Fig. S10d, ESI † ) that is consistent with previous reports. 50,51 Further elemental analysis with inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) reveals that the loading contents of diatomic metals are 4.68 (Fe) and 3.37 (Zn) wt%, respectively.

## Electronic structure of the catalyst

To determine the detailed electronic structure and local coordination environment of Fe/Zn-N-C, its X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) were measured. As shown in the K-edge XANES spectrum of Fe (Fig. 2a), the absorption edge of Fe/Zn-N-C is located between those of FeO and Fe2O3 as highlighted in the inset, indicating that the valence state of Fe is between +2 and +3 that is consistent with the XPS result. Meanwhile, its threshold of the near-side absorption is close to that of iron phthalocyanine (FePc), which demonstrates their similar coordination environment of these Fe sites. In the pre-edge region, a weak peak at B 7113 eV that is

## Energy &amp; Environmental Science

related to the 1s-3d transition of Fe and simultaneous charge transfer from the ligand to the metal can be observed, indicating a square geometry of the coordination structure for Fe. 51 The Fourier transform (FT) k 3 -weighted w ( k ) function of the EXAFS spectrum (Fig. 2b) shows a predominant peak near 1.5 Å of the Fe-N bond can be found for Fe/Zn-N-C, which is attributed to the first shell Fe-N coordination scattering. Correspondingly, the peak of Fe-Fe at 2.16 Å that is the highest peak in the spectrum of Fe foil is absent in that of Fe/Zn-N-C, further confirming its atomic dispersion of Fe species. Meanwhile, a small peak at 2.36 Å can be found, which indicates the formation of the paired Fe-Zn diatomic configuration. 36,52 The Fe-C bond peak at 2.5 Å of FePc is also not observed for Fe/ZnN-C. The subsequent least squares EXAFS fitting analysis proves that the Fe atomic site is coordinated with 4 N atoms (Fig. 2c and Table S3, ESI † ), as manifested in the theoretical model (inset, Fig. 2c). The detailed analysis for Zn species in Fe/Zn-N-C is presented in Fig. 2d-f. Herein, we believe that the existence of the Fe/Zn diatomic site is in the form of the FeZnN6 structure, rather than other configurations (Fig. S13, ESI † ). Its valence state is proved to be between 0 and +2 based on the observation that the location of the Zn absorption edge in the K-edge XANES spectrum (Fig. 2d) falls between that of Zn foil and ZnO. In contrast to the spectra of Zn foil and ZnO that show Zn-Zn and Zn-O-Zn signals at 2.3 Å and 2.8 Å, no similar bonds were found for Fe/Zn-N-C, while the Zn-N bond is the primary coordination form with a primary peak at 1.5 Å observed in the Fouriertransform EXAFS spectrum (Fig. 2e). Consistent with the Fe Kedge analysis, a small peak at 2.36 Å underlines the appearance of Zn-Fe interactions. The fitted coordination number and bond length between Zn and N are 4 and 2.01(4) Å (Fig. 2f and Table S5, ESI † ), respectively. Similar to Fe, a square geometric coordination is also proposed for Zn (inset, Fig. 2f). The k -space oscillation is converted from the energy space oscillation (Fig. 2g) with the R space data extracted through Fourier transform, providing a basis for fitting the bond length and the coordination number. We also performed the wavelet transform (WT) for EXAFS oscillations of Fe/Zn-N-C to visualize the dispersion of metal atomic sites with high resolution in the radial distance and k -space (Fig. 2h and i). It can be clearly observed that their WT signals are apparently different from the Fe-Fe ( B 8.6 Å /C0 1 ) and Zn-Zn ( B 7.5 Å /C0 1 )

Fig. 2 (a) Fe K-edge XANES and (b) Fourier-transform EXAFS spectra. (c) Corresponding EXAFS fitting curves at the Fe K-edge of Fe/Zn-N-C. (d) Zn Kedge XANES and (e) Fourier-transform EXAFS spectra. (f) Corresponding EXAFS fitting curves at the Zn K-edge of Fe/Zn-N-C. (g) K -space oscillations of different coordinated atoms. Wavelet transform (WT) contour plots of (h) FeN4 and (i) ZnN4.

<!-- image -->

bonds in Fe foil and Zn foil (Fig. S14, ESI † ). In line with XANES, EXAFS and the aforementioned microstructural analysis, this result further confirms the atomic dispersion of Fe and Zn sites with M-N4 configuration well established.

## ORR electrocatalytic activity and stability

The ORR activity of Fe/Zn-N-C was initially evaluated by measuring cyclic voltammetry (CV) and linear scan voltammetry (LSV) curves in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH with a rotating ringdisk electrode (RRDE) setup. Based on the CV curves (Fig. S15, ESI † ), Fe/Zn-N-C showed a more positive potential for the oxygen reduction peak than that in the singular M-N-C catalysts, confirming its higher ORR response. Correspondingly, LSV analysis (Fig. 3a) also shows that Fe/Zn-N-C exhibits a remarkable half-wave potential ( E 1/2 ) of 0.906 V, which is much higher than those of benchmark commercial Pt/C (0.834 V), Fe-N-C (0.875 V), Zn-N-C (0.821 V) and other reported M-N-C counterparts in references (Table S6, ESI † ). The E 1/2 value of Fe/Zn-N-C shown herein is also among the highest values in all reported electrocatalysts under alkaline

Fig. 3 (a) LSV curves of Fe/Zn-N-C, Fe-N-C, Zn-N-C and Pt/C for the ORR in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (b) LSV curves of Fe/Zn-N-C at different rotation rates. (c) Koutecky-Levich plots of Fe/Zn-N-C with a sweep rate of 5 mV s /C0 1 ( n E 4.02). (d) Corresponding Tafel plots obtained from RRDE polarization curves. (e) Dependence of current densities as a function of scan rates at 0.25 V vs . RHE. (f) Comparison of the limiting current density ( J L) and E 1/2. (g) LSV curves for the ORR in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution. Stability characterization with LSV curves measured before and after 5000 potential cycles at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm for (h) Fe/Zn-N-C, and (i) Fe-N-C.

<!-- image -->

|

## Paper

electrolytes. Furthermore, the LSV curves of all samples at different rotating speeds (Fig. 3b, Fig. S16a and S17a, ESI † ) were also recorded to calculate the average number of transferred electrons (n) through the Koutecky-Levich (K-L) equation with the corresponding plots presented (Fig. 3c, Fig. S16b and S17b, ESI † ). An n value of 4.02 was achieved for Fe/Zn-N-C, confirming the excellent 4-electron reaction path for its ORR process with remarkable selectivity. Furthermore, its lowest Tafel slope of 47 mV dec /C0 1 among all samples (Pt/C: 96, Fe-N-C: 52 and Zn-N-C: 74 mV dec /C0 1 ) also demonstrates the fastest reaction kinetics (Fig. 3d). The ORR reactivity was further analyzed with the kinetic current density ( J k) (Fig. S18, ESI † ) and the highest J k value of Fe/Zn-N-C further verified its remarkable ORR performance over other control samples. The electric double layer capacitance extracted from CV curves at different scan rates (Fig. S19, ESI † ) was calculated and this value is considered as an indicator for the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA). As shown in Fig. 3e, Fe/Zn-N-C shows a larger value of 99.0 mF cm /C0 2 than those for Fe-N-C (68.8 mF cm /C0 2 ), Zn-N-C (23.7 mF cm /C0 2 ) and Pt/C (31.0 mF cm /C0 2 ), revealing its higher effective active area for the ORR. LSV curves normalized by the ECSA demonstrate that Fe/Zn-N-C showed higher intrinsic ORR catalytic activities than Fe-N-C and Zn-N-C (Fig. S20, ESI † ). The overall alkaline ORR performance of catalysts is summarized in Fig. 3f with both values of limiting current density ( J L) and E 1/2 listed to directly showcase the superior reactivity of Fe/Zn-N-C over other counterparts, both in charge diffusion and transfer.

The acidic ORR was generally viewed as a tougher process than the ORR under alkaline electrolytes and some state-of-theart electrocatalysts with excellent performances in the alkaline medium did not show satisfactory reactivity under the harsh acidic conditions. 53 Based on this consideration, the electrocatalytic performance of Fe/Zn-N-C for the ORR was further explored in O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4. Compared to the case in the KOH electrolyte, Fe/Zn-N-C with excellent selectivity (Fig. S21-S23, ESI † ) also showed superior ORR performances over Fe-N-C and Zn-N-C, including a higher potential (0.80 V) of the oxygen reduction peak in the CV curve (Fig. S24, ESI † ), a lower Tafel slope (Fig. S25, ESI † ), and a larger kinetic current density (Fig. S26, ESI † ). In particular, a half-wave potential of 0.808 V was achieved in the acidic medium (Fig. 3g), which is comparable to Pt/C (0.810 V) and outperforms most ORR electrocatalysts reported in literature studies (Tables S7 and S8, ESI † ). In the acidic medium, Fe/Zn-N-C also showed the highest intrinsic activity (Fig. S27-S29, ESI † ). The durability of Fe/Zn-N-C was evaluated with RRDE and compared with Fe-N-C (Fig. 3h and i). After 5000 potential cycles, the loss of E 1/2 is only 12 mV for Fe/Zn-N-C, which is much smaller than that of Fe-N-C (28 mV). CV curves of Fe/Zn-N-C before and after cycles nearly overlap with each other (Fig. S30, ESI † ), which demonstrates its excellent tolerance capability to oxidation and degradation. 43 In addition, the long-time stability was measured by chronoamperometry, and the initial current of Fe/Zn-N-C was maintained at 90.4% for 20 hours (Fig. S31, ESI † ). To further confirm the stability of catalysts during the ORR, the

## Energy &amp; Environmental Science

amount of metal residues in the electrolyte after 5000 cycles of CV was measured by ICP-MS (Fig. S32 and Table S9, ESI † ). The minimal residual amount of Fe/Zn-N-C among all samples indicates its excellent stability. In order to further analyze the durability of the Fe/Zn-N-C catalyst, we characterized the samples after cycling. Compared with those of Fe-N-C and Zn-N-C, the active sites of Fe/Zn-N-C are well-maintained through XPS spectra analysis (Fig. S33-S35 and Table S10, ESI † ). In situ Raman spectroscopy (Fig. S36, ESI † ) also shows that the intensities of D and G peaks of Fe/Zn-N-C have no obvious change during the ORR at different potentials (1 V-0.3 V), indicating the excellent stability of the carbon material. The aforementioned results confirm the excellent stability of Fe/Zn-N-C in the harsh acidic medium. In order to investigate the device performance based on the as-prepared Fe/Zn-N-C catalyst, liquid zinc-air batteries (ZABs) were assembled. A high peak power density of 155.29 mW cm /C0 2 was achieved (Fig. S37, ESI † ). Furthermore, all-solid-state Zn-air batteries (ASS-ZABs) with Fe/Zn-N-C or controls as air electrodes were also assembled. The open circuit potential of the device from Fe/Zn-N-C is 1.429 V, which is much higher than those based on Fe-N-C (1.217 V) and Zn-N-C (1.159 V) (Fig. S38a, ESI † ). Meanwhile, ASS-ZABs based on Fe/Zn-N-C also showed excellent rate performances as shown in the galvanostatic discharge measurements at current densities from 1 to 10 mA cm /C0 2 (Fig. S38b, ESI † ). Its higher discharge voltage and more stable discharge platform at different current densities than those based on Fe-N-C and Zn-N-C further confirm the superior electrochemical performances of Fe/Zn-N-C over its counterparts (Fig. S38c, ESI † ). An example of using the ASS-ZABs with Fe/Zn-N-C as the practical energy storage device to light the emitting diodes was illustrated (Fig. S39, ESI † ). Meanwhile, the performances of ASS-ZAB based on Fe/Zn-N-C at different temperatures were further investigated and it showed impressive stability in a wide temperature range. Discharging at a current density of 1 mA cm /C0 2 , its voltage retention rates can still be 98.25% at 60 1 C, 98.67% at 25 1 C and 96.20% at 5 1 C, respectively, confirming the high device performances of Fe/Zn-N-C based catalysts and more importantly their potential low-temperature use that is rarely reported in previous ORR catalysts (Fig. S40, ESI † ).

## Reaction and stabilization mechanism

To reveal the catalytic mechanism of Fe/Zn-N-C, its protonation process was further studied by theoretical calculations, along with the single atom counterpart. Apparently, the calculated theoretical overpotential of the atomic pair is lower than those of Pt/C and Fe-N-C (Fig. 4a), demonstrating its highest reaction activity. To simulate the elementary steps of the ORR, the models of various reaction intermediates are built and the initial oxygen species is *O2. Based on the calculations on the designed configurations (Fig. S41, ESI † ), we believe that the cracking of the O-O bond for *O2 is not necessary in our case while the high energy barrier can be avoided through hydrogenation, which is consistent with the previous reports. 32,50 The free energy profiles involving four key reaction intermediates (*O2, *OOH, *O, and *OH) indicate that the potential determining step of Fe-based catalysts considered herein is the formation of the second H2O molecule, i.e. , *OH -H2O. The determining step herein is *OH desorption and the desorption energy is only related to the energy of *OH itself and the catalyst, which is independent of pH values. The low D G *OH (0.44 eV) of Fe-N-C underlines strong adsorption of *OH, which limits the reaction activity [ Z = (1.23 /C0 D G *OH)/ e = 0.79 V]. With the introduction of Zn, this value is elevated (0.82 eV) for Fe/Zn-N-C with an improvement in the overpotential by 0.41 V. For *OH reaction intermediates, both Fe-O and Zn-O bond lengths in Fe/Zn-N-C increase, i.e. , from 1.82 Å to 2.25 Å for Fe-O and from 1.87 Å to 1.97 Å for Zn-O (Fig. 4b), in well accordance with the fact that D G *OH decreases in the case of DACs. Furthermore, the differential charge density map (Fig. 4c, Fig. S42 and S43, ESI † ) and Bader charge (Fig. S44 and S45 and Tables S11-S17, ESI † ) of catalysts are calculated. In the Fe-N-C model, the number of charges transferred at the Fe site is 2.81 eV, while this value is reduced to 1.43 eV after the introduction of Zn, revealing a valence state transition from Fe 3+ (3d 5 ) to Fe 2+ (3d 6 ). Intriguingly, a semiconductor to half metal transition (Fig. 4d and e, Fig. S46 and S47, ESI † ) is also observed in the catalyst with cooperation of Zn, which populates spontaneous spin-polarized electrons at the Fermi level. More specifically, the 3d band is intrinsically narrow for Fe-N-C and broadened when combined with Zn. 54,55 Meanwhile, the itinerant electrons are positive to enhance charge transfer from the catalyst surface to reaction intermediates. Moreover, the spin of two unpaired electrons in the antibonding p * orbitals of the paramagnetic O2 molecule tends to orientate in the same direction in the stray field generated by the spin-polarized catalyst, and the completely spin-polarized itinerant electrons are more liable to form a bonded state, enhancing the capture of the O2 molecule that is the initial step of the ORR. This speculation is further proved by calculations for the Fe site modified by OH and O2 functional groups, which originate from water dissociation or oxygen adsorption during electrode reactions. The binding energy calculations (Table S18, ESI † ) reveal that *OH and *O2 can be preferentially adsorbed on the Fe site while their strong binding ability guarantees the occurrence of the ORR on the modified reaction center. This result discloses that the binding of *O2 adsorption improves the activity in both Fe-N-C and Fe/Zn-N-C.

Fig. 4 (a) Theoretical ORR overpotential for Fe/Zn-N-C and controls calculated from the Gibbs free energy diagram. (b) Relationship between overpotential and D G *OH as well as the metal-O bond length variation for Fe-N-C, Zn-N-C and Fe/Zn-N-C. (c) Charge density difference for Fe/Zn-N-C. (d and e) Schematic electronic structures of Fe-N-C and Fe/Zn-N-C. (f) Free energy diagrams of Fe/Zn-N-C(2*H). (g) D G 1*H and D G 2*H for catalysts in the presence of O2. (h) Protonation diagram of Fe/Zn-N-C.

<!-- image -->

|

Fig. 5 Schematic illustration of the protonation process. The introduction of Zn to form DACs can effectively elevate the protonation energy barrier of catalysts, enabling the highly efficient and durable ORR process.

<!-- image -->

Consistent with that of the bare DAC, the itinerant electrons are fully spin-polarized for the oxidized catalysts (Fig. 4a, and Fig. S48-S53, ESI † ). In contrast, although the overpotential is lowered in Fe-N-C(*OH), it is still higher than that of Pt/C, which can be ascribed to the normal metal band structure of Fe-N-C without completely spin-polarized itinerant electrons at the Fermi level. This band structure can enhance the charge transfer but cannot behave as efficiently as the half metal. As aforementioned, DACs are more robust during the protonation process and the protonation diagram (Fig. 4f) further presents the theoretical overpotential of Fe/Zn-N-C after a 2*H adsorption of 0.41 V, which is consistent with the value before protonation, proving the well-maintained reactivity of DACs after protonation. In view of the fact that surface oxidation might accelerate protonation, the free energy profile was re-checked by considering O2 molecule modification. As excepted, the free energies of 1*H and 2*H for catalysts are lowered in the presence of O2, while the absolute value is still high enough for Fe/Zn-N-C(*O2) to maintain excellent stability (Fig. 4g). In other words, excellent stability can remain even with O2 involvement for Fe/Zn-N-C, which is consistent with their ORR performance. The 2*H model of FeZnN6 verifies that N3 and N4 sites are preferentially bonded with the proton, leading to the breakage of Zn-N bonds (Table S19, ESI † ). Meanwhile, a slight increase in the bond lengths of Fe-N3 and Fe-N4 (from 1.79 to 1.91 Å) is observed after protonation, which protects FeN4 sites from destruction for the continuous and durable ORR process (Fig. 4h and Fig. S54-S57, ESI † ). Furthermore, the protonation process does not change the electronic structure of the FeN4 reaction center (but with ZnN4 sacrificed to ZnN2), which preserves completely spin-polarized conduction electrons at the Fermi level and maintains the promising reaction activity of DACs. An overall schematic was illustrated to visually present and elucidate the protonation process in Fig. 5.

## Conclusions

In summary, Fe/Zn-N-C was selected to improve the stability of Fe-based catalysts by theoretical predictions and a rationally designed diatomic site catalyst was correspondingly developed. The introduction of non-magnetic Zn 2+ into the atomic site was unraveled to change the electronic structure of Fe-N-C and a semiconductor to half metal transition occurs, leading to spontaneous spin-polarized electrons populated at the Fermi level for promoting its capture and bonding with O2. Meanwhile, the protonation energy barrier of catalysts was also elevated and ZnN4 was found to be sacrificed to protect the Fe site during the ORR. Benefiting from these characteristics, Fe/Zn-N-C presented remarkable ORR performances in both alkaline and acidic media with half-wave potentials of 0.906 V and 0.806 V, respectively, and more importantly showed superior stability with only 12 mV loss after 5000 potential cycles. This work may open up new opportunities for the design of high-performance and durable electrocatalysts which can promote the development of fuel cells/metalair batteries toward practical applications.

## Experimental

## Methods

Unless otherwise noted, all chemicals were purchased from Aladdin Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China), are of analytical grade, and were used as received without further purification. The details about material characterization techniques, electrochemical measurement methods and DFT calculation methods are presented in the ESI. †

## Carbon source pretreatment

10 g of chitosan was dispersed uniformly in 100 mL of deionized water followed by the addition of 5 g of ammonium chloride. After magnetically stirring for 12 hours, the mixture was then dried at 60 1 Covernight. The obtained power was ground and pretreated in a muffle furnace at 200 1 C for 4 hours with a heating ramp of 5 1 C min /C0 1 . Subsequently, this pre-carbonized chitosan was soaked in 6 M mixed acid solution (H2SO4 :HNO3 = 3: 1) for 12 hours for pre-oxidation treatment, and then washed alternately with deionized water and ethanol to neutral (pH = 7). The sample was freeze-dried for further use.

## Synthesis of Fe/Zn-N-C

After the above pretreatment, 0.8 g of chitosan was added in a mixed solution of water (25 mL) and ethanol (50 mL), and the mixture was magnetically stirred for uniform dispersion. 1 g of ammonium chloride, 0.15 g of anhydrous ferric chloride and 3.2 g of zinc chloride dissolved in deionized water (25 mL) were then added dropwise to the above suspension, stirred for 12 hours, and evaporated to dryness in a 60 1 C water bath. The obtained powder was uniformly ground and heated under a nitrogen atmosphere for carbonation at 750 1 C for 4 hours (the ramping rate is set at 3 1 C min /C0 1 ). During carbonation, the nitrogen atmosphere was used to avoid surface oxidation and the pyrolysis temperature was maintained at 750 1 C to avoid Zn evaporation with the ramping rate cautiously controlled. The carbonized sample was pickled with 1 M HCl for 24 hours and washed with deionized water to neutral (pH = 7), followed by powder separation through suction filtration and drying. The final product was obtained by another annealing at 900 1 C for 2 h under a nitrogen atmosphere with a ramping rate of 5 1 C min /C0 1 , which is denoted as Fe/Zn-N-C.

## Synthesis of Fe-N-C and Zn-N-C

The preparation protocols of Fe-N-C and Zn-N-C are the same as that of Fe/Zn-N-C, except using ferric chloride (for Fe-N-C) and zinc chloride (for Zn-N-C) as metal sources, respectively, to replace the mixture of anhydrous ferric chloride and zinc chloride used together for the synthesis of Fe/Zn-N-C.

## Author contributions

L. L. and H. G. L. conceived and designed the project. H. G. L. performed experiment preparation, material characterization, data analysis and original manuscript draft writing. S. L. D. conducted material characterization. P. N. and S. L. W. helped in supervising the project and performed result discussion. J. W. conducted theoretical calculations, result discussion and manuscript editing. L. L. supervised the project, performed manuscript editing and took charge of the overall planning and direction.

## Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts to declare.

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51904059), the Natural Science Foundation of Hebei Province (No. 2021203005 and B2021203016), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (N182505036, N2002005, and N2125004) and the Liao Ning Revitalization Talents Program (XLYC1807123). We also appreciate the instrumental analysis from Analytical and Testing Center, Northeastern University, and computation sources from High Performance Computing Center of Yanshan University.

## Notes and references

- 1 S. S. Shinde, J. Y. Jung, N. K. Wagh, C. H. Lee, D.-H. Kim, S.-H. Kim, S. U. Lee and J.-H. Lee, Nat. Energy , 2021, 6 , 592-604.
- 2 G. Yang, J. Zhu, P. Yuan, Y. Hu, G. Qu, B.-A. Lu, X. Xue, H. Yin, W. Cheng, J. Cheng, W. Xu, J. Li, J. Hu, S. Mu and J.-N. Zhang, Nat. Commun. , 2021, 12 , 1734.
- 3 Y. Lu, H. Wang, P. Yu, Y. Yuan, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, Y. Sheng, S. Wu, W. Tu, G. Liu, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Nano Energy , 2020, 77 , 105158.
- 4 J. Shan, C. Ye, S. Chen, T. Sun, Y. Jiao, L. Liu, C. Zhu, L. Song, Y. Han, M. Jaroniec, Y. Zhu, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 2021, 143 , 5201-5211.
- 5 Y. Wang, G. Jia, X. Cui, X. Zhao, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, L. Zheng, L. H. Li, Q. Wu, D. J. Singh, D. Matsumura, T. Tsuji, Y.-T. Cui, J. Zhao and W. Zheng, Chem , 2021, 7 , 436-449.
- 6 X. Wang, S. Ding, T. Yue, Y. Zhu, M. Fang, X. Li, G. Xiao, Y. Zhu and L. Dai, Nano Energy , 2021, 82 , 105689.
- 7 Z. Wang, J. Parrondo, C. He, S. Sankarasubramanian and V. Ramani, Nat. Energy , 2019, 4 , 281-289.
- 8 H. Bao, Y. Qiu, X. Peng, J.-a. Wang, Y. Mi, S. Zhao, X. Liu, Y. Liu, R. Cao, L. Zhuo, J. Ren, J. Sun, J. Luo and X. Sun, Nat. Commun. , 2021, 12 , 238.
- 9 M. Tong, F. Sun, Y. Xie, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, C. Tian, L. Wang and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. , 2021, 60 , 14005-14012.
- 10 Y. Ha, B. Fei, X. Yan, H. Xu, Z. Chen, L. Shi, M. Fu, W. Xu and R. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater. , 2020, 10 , 2002592.
- 11 L. Jiao, J. Li, L. L. Richard, Q. Sun, T. Stracensky, E. Liu, M. T. Sougrati, Z. Zhao, F. Yang, S. Zhong, H. Xu, S. Mukerjee, Y. Huang, D. A. Cullen, J. H. Park, M. Ferrandon, D. J. Myers, F. Jaouen and Q. Jia, Nat. Mater. , 2021, 20 , 1385-1391.
- 12 M. Xiao, L. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Wang, J. Zhu, Z. Jin, C. Liu, H. Chen, G. Li, J. Ge, Q. He, Z. Wu, Z. Chen and W. Xing, J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 2019, 141 , 19800-19806.
- 13 K. Chen, K. Liu, P. An, H. Li, Y. Lin, J. Hu, C. Jia, J. Fu, H. Li, H. Liu, Z. Lin, W. Li, J. Li, Y.-R. Lu, T.-S. Chan, N. Zhang and M. Liu, Nat. Commun. , 2020, 11 , 4173.
- 14 M. Xiao, J. Zhu, S. Li, G. Li, W. Liu, Y.-P. Deng, Z. Bai, L. Ma, M. Feng, T. Wu, D. Su, J. Lu, A. Yu and Z. Chen, ACS Catal. , 2021, 11 , 8837-8846.
- 15 A. Han, X. Wang, K. Tang, Z. Zhang, C. Ye, K. Kong, H. Hu, L. Zheng, P. Jiang, C. Zhao, Q. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. , 2021, 60 , 19262-19271.
- 16 W. Guo, Z. Wang, X. Wang and Y. Wu, Adv. Mater. , 2021, 33 , 2004287.
- 17 C.-X. Zhao, J.-N. Liu, J. Wang, D. Ren, B.-Q. Li and Q. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev. , 2021, 50 , 7745-7778.

|

- 18 P. Wang, Y. Ren, R. Wang, P. Zhang, M. Ding, C. Li, D. Zhao, Z. Qian, Z. Zhang, L. Zhang and L. Yin, Nat. Commun. , 2020, 11 , 1576.
- 19 G. Chen, P. Liu, Z. Liao, F. Sun, Y. He, H. Zhong, T. Zhang, E. Zschech, M. Chen, G. Wu, J. Zhang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater. , 2020, 32 , 1907399.
- 20 X. Wang, Y. Jia, X. Mao, D. Liu, W. He, J. Li, J. Liu, X. Yan, J. Chen, L. Song, A. Du and X. Yao, Adv. Mater. , 2020, 32 , 2000966.
- 21 J. Li, M. Chen, D. A. Cullen, S. Hwang, M. Wang, B. Li, K. Liu, S. Karakalos, M. Lucero, H. Zhang, C. Lei, H. Xu, G. E. Sterbinsky, Z. Feng, D. Su, K. L. More, G. Wang, Z. Wang and G. Wu, Nat. Catal. , 2018, 1 , 935-945.
- 22 B. Lu, Q. Liu and S. Chen, ACS Catal. , 2020, 10 , 7584-7618. 23 Y. Wang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater. , 2021, 33 , 2008151. 24 Y. Wang, X. Cui, L. Peng, L. Li, J. Qiao, H. Huang and J. Shi,
- Adv. Mater. , 2021, 33 , 2100997.
- 25 M. Tavakkoli, E. Flahaut, P. Peljo, J. Sainio, F. Davodi, E. V. Lobiak, K. Mustonen and E. I. Kauppinen, ACS Catal. , 2020, 10 , 4647-4658.
- 26 T. Sun, S. Mitchell, J. Li, P. Lyu, X. Wu, J. Pe ´rez-Ramı ´rez and J. Lu, Adv. Mater. , 2021, 33 , 2003075.
- 27 E. Luo, Y. Chu, J. Liu, Z. Shi, S. Zhu, L. Gong, J. Ge, C. H. Choi, C. Liu and W. Xing, Energy Environ. Sci. , 2021, 14 , 2158-2185.
- 28 W. Zhang, Y. Chao, W. Zhang, J. Zhou, F. Lv, K. Wang, F. Lin, H. Luo, J. Li, M. Tong, E. Wang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater. , 2021, 33 , 2102576.
- 29 S. Wang, L. Shang, L. Li, Y. Yu, C. Chi, K. Wang, J. Zhang, R. Shi, H. Shen, G. I. N. Waterhouse, S. Liu, J. Tian, T. Zhang and H. Liu, Adv. Mater. , 2016, 28 , 8379-8387.
- 30 G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science , 2011, 332 , 443.
- 31 W. Zang, Z. Kou, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater. , 2020, 10 , 1903181.
- 32 H. Xu, D. Cheng, D. Cao and X. C. Zeng, Nat. Catal. , 2018, 1 , 339-348.
- 33 X. Qu, Y. Han, Y. Chen, J. Lin, G. Li, J. Yang, Y. Jiang and S. Sun, Appl. Catal., B , 2021, 295 , 120311.
- 34 L. Jiao and H.-L. Jiang, Chem , 2019, 5 , 786-804.
- 35 J. Zhang, H. Yang and B. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater. , 2021, 11 , 2002473.
- 36 Z. Zeng, L. Y. Gan, H. Bin Yang, X. Su, J. Gao, W. Liu, H. Matsumoto, J. Gong, J. Zhang, W. Cai, Z. Zhang, Y. Yan, B. Liu and P. Chen, Nat. Commun. , 2021, 12 , 4088.
- 37 Y. Sun, J. Wang, Q. Liu, M. Xia, Y. Tang, F. Gao, Y. Hou, J. Tse and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A , 2019, 7 , 27175-27185.
- 38 L. Zhang, J. M. T. A. Fischer, Y. Jia, X. Yan, W. Xu, X. Wang, J. Chen, D. Yang, H. Liu, L. Zhuang, M. Hankel, D. J. Searles, K. Huang, S. Feng, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 2018, 140 , 10757-10763.
- 39 L. Zhuang, Y. Jia, H. Liu, X. Wang, R. K. Hocking, H. Liu, J. Chen, L. Ge, L. Zhang, M. Li, C.-L. Dong, Y.-C. Huang, S. Shen, D. Yang, Z. Zhu and X. Yao, Adv. Mater. , 2019, 31 , 1805581.
- 40 D. Li, B. Wang, X. Long, W. Xu, Y. Xia, D. Yang and X. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. , 2021, 60 , 26483.
- 41 J. Li, M. T. Sougrati, A. Zitolo, J. M. Ablett, I. C. Og ˘uz, T. Mineva, I. Matanovic, P. Atanassov, Y. Huang, I. Zenyuk, A. Di Cicco, K. Kumar, L. Dubau, F. Maillard, G. Draz ˇic ´ and F. Jaouen, Nat. Catal. , 2021, 4 , 10-19.
- 42 J. Li, S. Chen, N. Yang, M. Deng, S. Ibraheem, J. Deng, J. Li, L. Li and Z. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. , 2019, 58 , 7035-7039.
- 43 X. Xie, C. He, B. Li, Y. He, D. A. Cullen, E. C. Wegener, A. J. Kropf, U. Martinez, Y. Cheng, M. H. Engelhard, M. E. Bowden, M. Song, T. Lemmon, X. S. Li, Z. Nie, J. Liu, D. J. Myers, P. Zelenay, G. Wang, G. Wu, V. Ramani and Y. Shao, Nat. Catal. , 2020, 3 , 1044-1054.
- 44 Z. Lu, B. Wang, Y. Hu, W. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Yang, Z. Li, J. Luo, B. Chi, Z. Jiang, M. Li, S. Mu, S. Liao, J. Zhang and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. , 2019, 58 , 2622-2626.
- 45 D. Liu, B. Wang, H. Li, S. Huang, M. Liu, J. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Nano Energy , 2019, 58 , 277-283.
- 46 D. Wang, G. Du, D. Han, Q. Su, S. Ding, M. Zhang, W. Zhao and B. Xu, Carbon , 2021, 181 , 1-8.
- 47 L. Zhang, R. Si, H. Liu, N. Chen, Q. Wang, K. Adair, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Song, J. Li, M. N. Banis, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, M. Gu, L.-M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun. , 2019, 10 , 4936.
- 48 H. Zhao, C. Sun, Z. Jin, D.-W. Wang, X. Yan, Z. Chen, G. Zhu and X. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A , 2015, 3 , 11736-11739.
- 49 X. Zhao, X. Zou, X. Yan, C. L. Brown, Z. Chen, G. Zhu and X. Yao, Inorg. Chem. Front. , 2016, 3 , 417-421.
- 50 M. Xiao, Z. Xing, Z. Jin, C. Liu, J. Ge, J. Zhu, Y. Wang, X. Zhao and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater. , 2020, 32 , 2004900.
- 51 X. Ao, W. Zhang, Z. Li, J.-G. Li, L. Soule, X. Huang, W.H. Chiang, H. M. Chen, C. Wang, M. Liu and X. C. Zeng, ACS Nano , 2019, 13 , 11853-11862.
- 52 H. Sun, M. Wang, S. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Shen, T. Qian, X. Niu, J. Xiong and C. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater. , 2021, 31 , 2006533.
- 53 A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem. , 2018, 2 , 65-81.
- 54 J. Wang, H. Li, S. Liu, Y. Hu, J. Zhang, M. Xia, Y. Hou, J. Tse, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. , 2021, 60 , 181-185.
- 55 H. Li, J. Wang, R. Qi, Y. Hu, J. Zhang, H. Zhao, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B , 2021, 285 , 119778.